We present a convex formulation of compliant contact along with a robust
iterative method to solve it in practice. Our formulation eliminates contact
constraints analytically to write an unconstrained convex problem of
frictional contact on velocities only. Our method has proven convergence and
warms-starts effectively, enabling the simulation of complex multibody systems
with frictional contact at interactive rates. We show our model can be described
in clear physical terms, rather than in optimization specific terminology that
might be elusive to non optimization experts. This allows us to incorporate not
only point contact models of compliance, but also more sophisticated models of
compliant surface patches. Accurate physical modeling of contact is critical for
meaningful sim-to-real transfer. Moreover, we provide explicit analytical
expressions for the contact forces as a function of state, which allow us to
characterize artifacts introduced by the convex approximation in a novel and
transparent way. Based on the $\theta\text{-method}$, our time stepping scheme
includes not only the popular symplectic Euler method but also the second order
midpoint rule. We demonstrate that the midpoint rule can achieve second order
accuracy even in simulation through frictional contact. We introduce a number of
accuracy metrics and show that our method outperforms existing commercial and
open source alternatives without sacrificing accuracy. Finally, with the
simulation of relevant robotic systems for manipulation, we demonstrate our
approach can accurately resolve stiction, is robust and performs at interactive
rates. Our method is implemented in the open source Drake robotics toolkit.
