\section{Associate Editor}
\label{sec:associate_editor}

\textcolor{blue}{Three Reviewers evaluated the submitted paper. Their comments
are reported and should be carefully followed. In particular, the Reviewers
highlighted several criticisms.}
\textcolor{blue}{\begin{itemize}
    \item Linearization effects should be better highlighted (Reviewer 1).
\end{itemize}}
Linearization of the equations of motion is a very common approximation in many
other time stepping schemes for multibody dynamics in the literature, specially
so if contact is involved. However, the details might be elusive if not properly
mentioned. Therefore we do agree with this review, these approximations must be
mentioned explicitly.
\RedHighlight{TODO: consider adding this into a Limitations section.}

Reviewer 1 comments on linearization effects in questions R1-Q1, R1-Q2 and
R1-Q3. We provided specific answers to each of these questions in this document
and updated the manuscript accordingly. 

\textcolor{blue}{\begin{itemize}
    \item It seems that the approach has an implicitly defined constraint,
\end{itemize}}
Constraints in this formulation are eliminated using analytic formulae that we
provide in this work. We provided more details in the answer to R1-Q7 in this
document.

\textcolor{blue}{which contradicts the claim of an unconstrained problem. If
this impression is confirmed, then the global convergence of the method becomes
unclear (Reviewer 1).}

We address this point in answer to R1-Q4, with mention specific theorems and
results in our work. We highlighted updates in the manuscript accordingly.

\textcolor{blue}{
\begin{itemize}
    \item A more in-depth analysis of the matrices K, D, and H should be
    carried out. Can they be non-symmetric? (Reviewer 4)
\end{itemize}}

This is an important aspect of our work. While we do not impose any restriction
on the gradient $\partial \mf{m}/\partial \mf{v}$ (with the momentum residual
$\mf{m}$ defined in Eq. 14), we do require its approximation $\mf{A}$ to be SPD.
We address this question in detail in R4-Q3 and in the updated manuscript.


\textcolor{blue}{
\begin{itemize}
    \item Authors should clearly state the limitation of the approach. This
regards scalability (Reviewer 4), objects convexity (Reviewer 8), change in
contact modes during the task( Reviewer 8), and possible others. \end{itemize}}

Scalability is addressed in R4-Q7, objects convexity in R8-Q1, and changes in
contact modes in R8-Q3, along specific updates to the manuscript.

In addition, we added \RedHighlight{Section XXX} discussing these and other
limitations of our approach.

\RedHighlight{TODO: ok, Done deal. Add a Limitations section that includes all
the topics here and the TODOs I sprinkled all over.}

\vspace{5mm}
\textcolor{blue}{After a careful reading of the paper, this Associate Editor
agrees with all the points raised by the Reviewers.}

We agree with the points raised as well. We believe the updated manuscript is an
improvement over the original version thanks to the reviewers' comments.

\vspace{5mm}
\textcolor{blue}{In addition, this AE has the following further comments.}
\textcolor{blue}{
\begin{itemize}
    \item As also highlighted by Reviewer 1, the current paper's outline
confuses the reader and makes the reading flow difficult. This AE suggests
deeply revising the organization of the contents. One solution is to avoid
fragmenting the content in so many different sections. Authors should organize
the same focus in one or two bigger sections and exploit subsections to split
the related content. For instance, this AE believes that Sections V, VI, VII,
and IX may be unified. Instead, it is not clear why Sections II, III, and IV
have been split in such a way, also because the same concepts are often repeated
(as the fact that "the proposed approach does not approximate the friction cone
but [...]").On the other hand, the state of the art can be removed from Section
I, and a dedicated (sub)section may be created. Novelties (and limitations of
the approach as said above) should be addressed in separated subsections.
Therefore, a considerable re-organization of the contents is suggested.
\end{itemize}}

\textcolor{blue}{
\begin{itemize}
    \item Authors performed a good state of the art within the Introduction,
    mentioning much software such as ODE, Dart, Vortex, Mujoco, and Chrono. The
    authors also provide differences between the cited software and the one
    proposed in the reviewed paper. However, RaiSim [AE1,AE2] is
    missing.\end{itemize}}

\textcolor{blue}{
\begin{itemize}
    \item What is the "gap function" in section II?\end{itemize}}
    
\textcolor{blue}{\begin{itemize}
\item Maybe, a $\delta t$ term is missing in the last term of Eq. (2).
\end{itemize}} 

\textcolor{blue}{\begin{itemize}
\item In Section II, the non-penetration constraint equation has a non-explained
symbolism. Please, clarify the expressions with the $\perp$ symbol (see also Eq.
(4)).\end{itemize}} 
    
\textcolor{blue}{\begin{itemize}
\item At the beginning of Section VII, it is written that "the approach is
different from the one in [16], where regularization is not used to model
physical compliance but rather to introduce a user tunable Baumgarte-style"
stabilization to avoid constant drift." It is unclear to this AE whether this
difference is due to a different interpretation of the regularization term or it
is substantial, affecting the theoretical part.\end{itemize}} 

\vspace{5mm}
\textcolor{blue}{\begin{itemize}
    \item[AE1] https://raisim.com
    \item[AE2] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, M. Hutter, "Pre-contact iteration method for
solving contact dynamics," IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 3, n. 2,
pp. 895-902, 2018.\end{itemize}} 

