\section{Conclusion}
\label{sec:future_directions}

We presented a formulation of compliant contact with a novel physics-based
parameterization. We show that forces can be succinctly described by analytical
expressions with a clear physical intuition. This allowed us to incorporate not
only point contact but also more complex models of surface patches. We then show
that when these forces are used in the momentum equations, we obtain the
optimality conditions for an unconstrained convex formulation. We make a
rigorous presentation of the numerical approximations and a novel
characterization of the artifacts introduced by the convex approximation of
contact; the approximation is exact for sticking contact and introduces an
$\mathcal{O}(\delta t\|\vf{v}_t\|)$ \emph{gliding} effect for sliding contact.

We developed a two-stages time stepping approach based on the
$\theta\text{-method}$ and we show that with the midpoint rule it can achieve
second order accuracy even in problems with frictional contact. Our formulation
does not linearize the friction cone but it works with the second order cone
constraints directly.

We presented SAP, a robust and performant solver for this formulation that
warm-starts very effectively in practice. We provide global converge guarantees
from any initial guess and show: worst case linear convergence, and quadratic
convergence when additional smoothness conditions are satisfied. We show SAP
exhibits these two converge regimes in simulations of practical relevance. Our
work includes thorough details for implementation, including analytical
formulae for gradients and Hessian, sparsity analysis and custom line-search.

We compare the performance of SAP against commercial and open source
optimization solvers. Using quantitative accuracy metrics we show that SAP
outperforms the alternatives not only without sacrificing accuracy, but even at
a higher accuracy and added robustness. SAP can be up to 50 times faster than
Gurobi in small problems with up to a dozen objects and up to 10 times faster in
medium sized problems with about 100 objects. Even though SAP uses the
supernodal algebra implemented for Geodesic IPM, it performs at least two times
faster given how effectively it warms-starts from the previous time-step
solution. Moreover, SAP exhibits significantly more robustness in practice given
that it guarantees a hard bound on the error in momentum, effectively providing
a certificate of accuracy.
