% Dummy comment for Reviewable.

\subsection{Contact Kinematics}
\label{sec:contact_modeling}

Given a configuration $\mf{q}$ of the system, we assume our geometry engine
reports a set $\mathscr{C}(\mf{q})$ of $n_c$ potential contacts between pairs of
bodies. We characterize the $i\text{-th}$ \emph{contact pair} in
$\mathscr{C}(\mf{q})$ by the location $\vf{p}_i$ of the contact point, a normal
direction $\hat{\vf{n}}_i$ and \emph{signed distance function}
\cite{bib:flores2021contact,bib:pfeiffer1996multibody}
$\phi_i(\mf{q})\in\mathbb{R}$, defined negative for overlapping bodies. The
kinematics of each contact is further completed with the relative velocity
$\vf{v}_{c,i}\in\mathbb{R}^3$ between these two bodies at point $\vf{p}_i$,
expressed in a contact frame $C_i$ for which we arbitrarily choose the
$z\text{-axis}$ to coincide with the contact normal $\hat{\vf{n}}_i$. In this
frame the normal and tangential components of $\vf{v}_{c,i}$ are given by
$v_{n,i} = \hat{\vf{n}}_i\cdot\vf{v}_{c,i}$ and $\vf{v}_{t,i} =
\vf{v}_{c,i}-v_{n,i}\hat{\vf{n}}_i$ respectively, so that
$\vf{v}_{c,i}=[\vf{v}_{t,i}\,v_{n,i}]$.

We form the vector $\mf{v}_{c}\in\mathbb{R}^{3n_c}$ of contact velocities by
stacking velocities $\vf{v}_{c,i}$ of all contact pairs together. In general,
unless otherwise specified, we use bold italics for vectors in $\mathbb{R}^3$
and non-italics bold for their stacked counterpart. The generalized velocities
$\mf{v}$ and contact velocities $\mf{v}_c$ satisfy the equation
$\mf{v}_c=\mf{J}\,\mf{v}$, where $\mf{J}(\mf{q})\in\mathbb{R}^{3n_c\times n_v}$
denotes the contact Jacobian.
