% Dummy comment for Reviewable.

\algblockdefx{RepeatUntil}{EndRepeatUntil}{\textbf{repeat until}}{}
\algnotext{EndRepeatUntil}

\subsection{An Unconstrained Convex Formulation}
\label{sec:unconstrained_convex_formulation}

\reviewquestion{R1-Q7}{We use the analytical $\bgamma =
P_{\mathcal{F}}(\mf{y}(\mf{v}))$ from Section
\ref{sec:analytical_inverse_dynamics} and the optimality condition $\vf{\sigma}
= \bgamma$ from Theorem~\ref{th:primal_dual} to eliminate both $\vf{\sigma}$ and
the constraints from the primal formulation \eqref{eq:primal_regularized}. In
total, we obtain the following unconstrained problem in velocities only}
\begin{eqnarray}
	\min_{\mf{v}} \ell_p(\mf{v}) = \frac{1}{2}\Vert\mf{v}-\mf{v}^*\Vert_{A}^2 +
	\frac{1}{2}\Vert P_\mathcal{F}(\mf{y}(\mf{v}))\Vert_R^2.
	\label{eq:primal_unconstrained}
\end{eqnarray}
Correctness of this reformulation is asserted by the following theorem, which we
prove in Appendix \ref{app:unconstrained_formulation_equivalance}.
\begin{theorem}
  If  $\mf{v}$ solves the unconstrained formulation
    (\ref{eq:primal_unconstrained}), then $(\mf{v}, \bsigma)$, with $\bsigma
    =P_\mathcal{F}(\mf{y}(\mf{v}))$, solves the primal formulation
    (\ref{eq:primal_regularized}).
    \label{th:unconstrained_formulation_equivalance}
\end{theorem}
Lemma \ref{lem:PropertiesOfObj} in Appendix \ref{app:sap_converge} shows that
the unconstrained cost $\ell_p(\mf{v})$ is strongly convex and differentiable
with Lipschitz continuous gradients. Therefore, the unconstrained formulation
(\ref{eq:primal_unconstrained}) has a unique solution, and can be efficiently
solved.  
Section \ref{sec:sap_solver} presents our novel SAP solver specifically designed
for its solution.

We outline our time-stepping scheme in Algorithm \ref{alg:sap_time_stepping}.
\begin{algorithm}
	\caption{Overall Time-Stepping Strategy}
	  \label{alg:sap_time_stepping}
	  \begin{algorithmic}[1]
		  \State Solve free motion velocities from
		  $\mf{m}(\mf{v}^*)=\mf{0}$, Eq. \eqref{eq:m_definition}
		  \State Solve $\displaystyle \mf{v} = \argmin_{\mf{v}} \ell_p(\mf{v})$, Eq. \eqref{eq:primal_unconstrained}
		  \State Update positions $\displaystyle \mf{q} = \mf{q}_0 + \delta
		  t\mf{N}(\mf{q}^{\theta})\mf{v}^{\theta_{vq}}$, Eqs. \eqref{eq:qdot_map_to_v}-\eqref{eq:scheme_q_update}
	  \end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}

\reviewquestion{R1-Q1/R1-Q2}{We note that Algorithm \ref{alg:sap_time_stepping}
is executed once per time step, with no inner iterations updating $\mf{A}$. That
is, our strategy is not solving the original, possibly nonlinear, balance of
momentum \eqref{eq:scheme_momentum} but its (second-order accurate) linear
approximation in \eqref{eq:momentum_linearized}. This approximation can be exact
for many multibody systems encountered in practice. For instance, joint springs
and dampers contribute constant stiffness and damping matrices in
\eqref{eq:expression_for_A}.}

